---
title: '<span class="detectable">
  <span class="math-var d">d′</span>ete<span class="math-var c">c</span>table</span>:
  An Explorable Explanation of Signal Detection Theory'
layout: page
script: page
---

## Introduction

Welcome to **<span class="math-var">d′</span>ete<span class="math-var">c</span>table**, an
interactive introduction to Signal Detection Theory (SDT). This site uses manipulable diagrams,
dynamic tables, and live equations to explain the motivation, conceptualization, and application of
SDT.

SDT was originally developed to understand the decisions of radar operators attempting to detect the
faint traces of enemy aircraft, bogeys, among the spurious flashes on the radar screen
:cite[@Marcum1947; @Tanner1954; @Peterson1954]. The fundamental question was: How does a person
decide if they are seeing signal or noise?

In answering this question, researchers attempted to decompose the underlying cognitive process into
its constituent parts. Then they specified a theory describing these parts in a formal mathematical
model. The result was Signal Detection Theory :cite[@Green1966].

SDT can be viewed as an early and classic example of computational cognitive neuroscience - the
interdisciplinary study of mind, brain, and behavior through the melding of computational,
psychological, and neuroscientific approaches. It does this by linking observed behavior to known
neural mechanisms through a formal computational account of cognition :cite[@Gold2007].

SDT simply and elegantly explains patterns found in actual perceptual decision-making data; it makes
non-trivial predictions that can be tested; and it fits into a developing understanding of
perceptual decision making as neural evidence accumulation :cite[@Gold2002]. Thus the importance of
SDT arises from its generality, specificity, and plausibility. As a result, it has been applied to a
diverse set of problems, from memory retrieval :cite[@Berry2008; @Banks1970] to medical decision
making :cite[@Lusted1971].

This site approaches SDT from multiple complementary points of view. First, we use SDT to *fit*
your empirical data from an example task, and consider how well the theory accounts for the data.
Second, we use SDT to make *predictions* by running simulations with an SDT-based model performing
the task and generating synthetic data. And third, we *explore* the space of possible results that
can be generated by SDT, providing an existence proof for its capabilities.

So let's get started!
